---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---

# Work in progress 

## Trade-induced structural transformation and household-level inequality: Lessons from Vietnam

**Abstract:** Much is understood about how trade affects gender inequality in terms of labour force participation and wages at the firm and sector level. However, how trade affects gender inequality at the household-level is an under explored area of research. This paper uses the US-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) that came into force in 2001 to explore how the disproportionate expansion of female-intensive sectors can trigger the structural transformation of the female labour force, and how this affects women's share of contribution to the total household income. By using a panel households from the Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey and through exploiting provincial variation in exposure to the BTA, I find that women increased their contribution to the total household income by 10.8 percentage points in the 4 years following the implementation of the trade agreement. I then examine whether the closing of the spousal household contribution gap led to changes in the allocation of household resources that could be indicative of higher female intrahousehold bargaining power, and find that household consumption of `female-preferred' goods did not increase. An explanation for why women's intrahousehold bargaining position did not improve is that since divorce is not widely practiced in Vietnam, and since exposure to the BTA did not lead to a change in norms surrounding divorce, women's threat option did not become more credible in circumstances of noncooperative bargaining between spouses.Much is understood about how trade affects gender inequality in terms of labour force participation and wages at the firm and sector level. However, how trade affects gender inequality at the household-level is an under explored area of research. This paper uses the US-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement (BTA) that came into force in 2001 to explore how the disproportionate expansion of female-intensive sectors can trigger the structural transformation of the female labour force, and how this affects women's share of contribution to the total household income. By using a panel households from the Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey and through exploiting provincial variation in exposure to the BTA, I find that women increased their contribution to the total household income by 10.8 percentage points in the 4 years following the implementation of the trade agreement. I then examine whether the closing of the spousal household contribution gap led to changes in the allocation of household resources that could be indicative of higher female intrahousehold bargaining power, and find that household consumption of `female-preferred' goods did not increase. An explanation for why women's intrahousehold bargaining position did not improve is that since divorce is not widely practiced in Vietnam, and since exposure to the BTA did not lead to a change in norms surrounding divorce, women's threat option did not become more credible in circumstances of noncooperative bargaining between spouses.
